I
want the future to be at least as good
as the recent past uh and yet things
look much more ominous now than at any
time since the early 1940s and I don't
think we're going to fix it um by
surrender uh whether it's economic
surrender whether it's military
surrender surrender is not the way um a
a decent and self-confident approach is
is going to be best for
[Music]
everyone hello everyone watching and
listening today I'm speaking with
Australian journalist and former prime
minister The Honorable Tony Abbott we
met before once in Australia and and
this will be a followup to that we
discuss Australia's role on the world
stage the problems facing the Australian
economy and culture the broader problems
that face the West how the Quasi Cult of
carbon threatens in particular the poor
in the developing World why new
religions propagate where traditional
faith has been abdicated and the looming
threat of War as China destabilizes and
Putin pushes forward against Ukraine we
also discuss our joint involvement in
the alliance for responsible citizenship
the ark which is a new Venture um
grounded in London designed to put
forward a positive vision of the future
that everyone could in principle be on
board with
voluntarily so Mr Abbott let's start by
talking about Australia as a whole I
mean what role do you think Australia
plays on the international front now
like H how how do you think Australia
should should be conceptualized by
people outside of the country well
Jordan I think Australia is one of those
wonderful countries which is big enough
to be interesting and significant but
not so big as to be intimidating and
threatening and Australia's history is
such that there's really no one anywhere
in the world who has a grievance against
us um and that's not true of so many
other countries uh you think of the
United States you think of Britain you
think of France you think of Germany you
think of Italy you think of Russia you
think of China there are grievances uh
that different countries have against
all of those countries that all of those
countries have great strengths as well
but um Australia is one of those happy
places uh which has been a welcoming
home to migrants from all over the world
uh yes we fought on Britain's side in
two world wars and we fought as
America's Ally in just about every uh
conflict over the last 100 years that
America's been in and yet we've managed
to do that uh while retaining I think
our Global
reputation as a country which is free
which is fair and which wants to be a
good mate uh to the people and the
countries of the world wherever we
can so that at least in principle lays
open the option for countries like
Australia and I suppose this was true of
Canada for a good while too although I
don't know if it is any longer to play a
role in what would you say being a good
faith partner in brokering peace for
example and so um what problems do you
think Australia faces at the moment what
and what and H how how are the issues
that are broadly besetting the West say
on the cultural War Front making
themselves manifest in Australia
well the problems that every country has
all the
time are essentially how do we maintain
our prosperity how do we maintain our
security um and just at the moment uh
this is perhaps a little bit more acute
than usual uh we've got all of the
challenges which um all of the Western
countries currently face uh We've Got U
the risk of recession we've got uh
highish inflation we've got all of the
supply chain issues which arose from the
pandemic and then the conflict in
Ukraine then the degree of decoupling
with China so we've got all of those
issues we've got uh a particular problem
with
energy while we are abundantly bless
Jordan with with coal with gas with
uranium we don't have all that much oil
but because of the emissions Obsession
uh we are not using these blessings
sufficiently to our own Advantage so
that's a particular problem that we've
got we're exporting our coal and our gas
uh to the countries that are still only
too eager to get it but we're not
readily using it as much as we should
here and then of course being in the
um asia-pacific region obviously we're
very conscious of China um in particular
China under the Communist party and the
challenges that that poses um I keep
saying that the disruption that has been
caused globally by the Russian attack on
Ukraine is small beer compared to the
disruption that would be caused globally
by any attack from the Beijing regime on
Taiwan given its much greater
significance in the world economy and
given the effective security guarantees
that the United States has always given
to Taiwan so so look um th those
constant challenges of security and
prosperity are particularly acute right
now uh you ask about the cultural issues
which are afflicting the West we may be
maybe 5 years behind America maybe 3
years behind the United States uh uh the
United Kingdom but we have them here too
Jordan um our
universities are are are more into
brainwashing than the best that's been
thought and said uh our schools um
they're nice places in the sense that
they want to teach our kids uh to be
nice to each other but I'm not sure that
there's that much rigorous learning
going on or as much as it
should all right so let's let's dive in
we we we outlined a number of potential
issues there of of concern let's dive in
first to what you described as the
emissions Obsession and so this is
something that Australia and Canada
share uh particularly um Canada is
blessed on the fossil fuel front and we
have vast uh reserves of uranium as well
and we are doing everything we can at
the federal level in Canada to Scuttle
the oil and gas industry in in favor
hypothetically of Renewables which is a
really bad idea in in a country like
Canada which is massive and completely
in inhospitable to human life and in
Australia you guys have the same issues
in many ways ambivalence about utilizing
your natural resources but strangely
enough very little compunction in
sending them to China coal in particular
and this strikes me as extremely
peculiar given that the Chinese as far
as I know breathe the same atmosphere we
do and if the Chinese are building Coal
Fired plants like Madmen which they
clearly are then what difference does it
make to us in the west let's say except
in terms of prosperity whether or not we
use our technology to produce relatively
clear clean say Coal Fired plants or the
Chinese do it in China like what in the
world is the POS rationale for that as
far as you're concerned well Jordan I
find it as mysterious as you do uh we
are
inflicting gratuitous economic damage on
ourselves without doing any good to the
global environment by refusing to use
coal and gas in this country while
exporting as much coal and gas as we can
sell to others particularly China and
the interesting thing is that uh while
we are fastidious in measuring and
reducing our emissions uh we are
fastidious in making commitments to The
Wider world that we are determined to
keep um we're oblivious to the fact that
emissions are going up and up because uh
Russia China and India for
understandable enough reasons are making
no such commitment so so this is really
an act of economic self harm that we are
engaged in it's a kind of um virtue
signaling on a national scale and I very
much regret it um I regard myself as a
as a as a conservationist uh I I accept
that we only have one planet I accept
that if you look back over um what we
know to have been the history of the
planet uh there certainly has been
global warming there has been global
cooling there've been hotter times
there' have been colder times so climate
change is real in that sense although
you can argue about the contribution
that Mankind's carbon dioxide makes to
it but um certainly the efforts that we
in this country are making to reduce
emissions are harming us and they're not
actually making any difference to Global
emissions and I just think that's pretty
irrational well it seems to me that you
could make a case that not only are they
no doing no good on the global emissions
front that in places like Germany these
idiot green policies have actually made
the emission situation worse and so you
know one way you could conceptualize
this that sort of cuts across the
political
argument problem is that if the green
policies that have been implemented by
countries like Germany fulfilled their
own mandate at minimum you could say
that they have some credibility so you
know you could look at Germany and you
could think well electricity is more
expensive and it's more unreliable and
the Germans are dependent on the
Russians and and other relatively
autocratic states to provide their
energy but at least carbon emissions
have gone down but in fact in Germany
partly because they've had to turn to
burning Lig night and they shut their
nuclear plants down which was an active
unconscionable stupidity they're
actually producing I think it's 10 times
as many emissions per unit of
electricity as France and far more and
they're far more polluting on the energy
front than they were like seven years
ago so not only have they failed utterly
on the economic front they're actually
doing worse by their own criteria and
the same thing has to be true of
countries like Canada and Australia when
you look at it globally if we export our
resources to China and they do a
relatively bad job of generating
electricity especially given the immense
corruption in countries like that why in
the world wouldn't we do that in the
west where we could do it you know with
a certain degree of let's call it
finesse and
so I cannot see that there's something
wrong with my reasoning when I walk
through the problem in that sense and
so what do you think about that is is
there something that I'm missing say in
relationship to Germany or is this is
foolish as it appears to be well Jordan
I think this is Monumental Folly I think
it is self-destructive Folly but I think
what we are dealing with here is
something more akin to a new religion uh
than ordinary um considerations of
rational self-interest and um even
ordinary stock standard idealism as I
said I'm all in favor of doing what we
can to protect the planet but I'm not in
favor of doing things which harm us and
don't help the planet and plainly that's
what's going on right now one of the
many reasons why I think there's a
religious Dimension to all of this uh a
kind of a almost like a cultish
dimension to all of this is that the
same people who are most insistent on
the urgency of emissions reduction are
normally deeply hostile to the only form
of emissions free uh 24/7 BAS power
namely nuclear now if it really is
absolutely essential that we move
rapidly to a zero emissions world and if
we do want at the same time to maintain
our standards of living there's really
only one way to go and that's nuclear
which is proven reliable safe um it may
well be somewhat more expensive uh at
this time than alternative
certainly than coal and gas and oil but
we know it works and we know it's
emissions free uh we know that France
has been generating something like 70%
of its electricity from nuclear for the
best part of 40 or 50 years they haven't
had any significant accidents so why not
do something like this uh in other
countries uh if we really do think that
that emissions are as important as all
that
the the the religious cult idea
so I think I want to pick up two streams
of thought there I'm also puzzled like
you with regard to attempting to
conceptualize the opposition to nuclear
power because the the bitter pill we're
asked to swallow constantly is that
climate change in the caused by
excessive carbon dioxide
production poses an existential threat
to Mankind and so that's the ultimate
shth let's say with regard to the
radicals on the left or people who are
utilizing radical left ideas for their
own nefarious purposes let's say and if
that is the case then and we're willing
to contemplate uh tactics like
geoengineering because I know the Biden
Administration for example is toying
with the idea of blotting out the sun
like Mr Burns in The Simpsons and if
we're willing to go to that extreme or
even to look into going to that extreme
then why in the world wouldn't we turn
to nuclear and the answer has to be as
far as I'm can tell tell and tell me if
what you think about this is that
there's actually an anti-industrial ism
and an anti-humanism at the basis of the
climate apocalypse claims and so the
anti-humanism is something it's often
expressed in the form of the claim that
there are too many people on the planet
you know and that we could only and you
hear more extreme versions of this uh
where the claim is well we could really
only um tolerate in an ecologically
sustainable manner a population of about
500 million which is a big problem given
that there's 8 billion people and we'd
have to figure out what to do with all
those excess bodies and that even if we
did have 500 million those people would
have to live you know basically at a
subsistence level so that we wouldn't be
scraping the surface of the planet too
with too much diligence okay and so I
have a lot of problems with that
standpoint not least because there's an
element of it that's genocidal and then
there's a kind of naive rousan
anti-industrial ISM that seems to go
along with that which is part and parcel
of the claim that all human activity is
somehow pathological and that we're
violating some essential state of nature
and then that all that mess because
that's a mess also is allied with
something that I think is even darker
which is this attempt by the
hypothetically a religious radicals on
the environmental front to reduce the
entire panoply of human problems to one
issue and that's of carbon dioxide and
then to claim for themselves an elevated
moral virtue that goes along with well
opposing carbon dioxide at all costs so
to me that's you know one of The
Commandments is that you're not to use
the lord's name in vain and that
commandment means that you shouldn't
claim Divine virtue or even moral virtue
when you're actually acting in a manner
that's only benefiting yourself and I
see that as the cardinal sin of this new
religion which is all morality can be
reduced to the claim that I'm a good
person because I oppose carbon dioxide
and to hell with the cost and I'll add
one more thing to that which and which
is that from what I've been able to
understand if you can help the world's
poor raise their average income on the
GDP uh with GDP as a measurement to
about $5,000 a year which pops them out
of basic subsistence then they start to
be able to take a longer term view of
their future and their children's future
and to attend to environmental issues
spontaneously so my sense is that we
could we could have a planet that was
full of thriving people with a large
population if people were Rich enough
and that would mean that they would have
to have access to cheap energy and if we
did that globally then everyone would
spontaneously start to evince concern
for the environment so we could have
like a flourishing population and a
planet that works and so what the hell
is wrong with that why isn't that a good
plan well well nothing's wrong with that
Jordan uh it's a very sensible plan and
if you want to look at environmental
Devastation the places where you will
find environmental Devastation are the
poorer countries uh where they can't
look after their forests they can't look
after their paddocks and Fields uh where
they can't afford to worry about the
conservation of native animals um it's
really only the better off countries
where we can take all these things
seriously because in the other countries
they're embarked in a constant struggle
just to stay alive and this is why as
you say if if we want a better
environment and if over time we want the
world's population to stabilize and
perhaps even reduce a little um if you
look at what has already happened in
many of the more developed countries
let's do what we can uh through
um trade and through the encouragement
of better governance let's do what we
can through the encouragement of decent
education and and and the liberation of
minorities let's do what we can to try
to bring uh what are currently the most
impoverished countries up to as you say
a better level of life um I mean you're
right once the country gets up to about
$5,000
us uh per person per year in in national
income um things start to transform and
if you look at some of the countries of
Africa which have got to this level uh
they are very very different countries
in in a host of ways to what they were
just a couple of decades
back the October 15th tax deadline has
just passed I know many of you might be
dreading the stress of filing your taxes
f filing your taxes can be a long
excruciating process but if you fail to
file you'll start to pile penalties on
top of your tax debt that's why you need
to check out tax Network USA the team at
tax Network USA has a track record of
success they've reduced tax debts for
numerous clients totaling over $1
billion whether you're looking at a
$10,000 or $1 million tax debt they can
help you with the settlement it doesn't
matter if you haven't filed in one year
5 years or even a Whole Decade tax
Network USA is equipped to secure the
best settlement for you the expert
attorneys and tax professionals at tax
Network USA can help resolve all tax
cases no matter how they started don't
let tax debt control your life any
longer take the first step toward
resolving your tax issues by visiting
tax Network
usa.com Peterson that's tax Network
usa.com Peterson
today right well I know that you have
recently agreed to
participate in this uh Alliance for
responsible citizenship conference and
movement that we organizing in in London
in in October and I mean part of our
vision on the energy and environment
front well it's it's two-dimensional the
first proposition is stemming off of
what we've already discussed is that we
don't have the moral right to sacrifice
the world's poor either in the west or
in the developing world to our to our
narrow green agenda especially because
it's not going to work anyways and it
puts all these people at risk and so you
see this this very strange conundrum
right because the left in principle
historically has been the voice of the
oppressed in the working class and a
particularly let's say strong voice for
the poor but when you see now what's
happening that that the the radical
environmentalist types in particular
seem to be willing to sacrifice the
world's poor at the drop of a hat to not
make any progress whatsoever on the
planetary salvation front right like I
said it would be different if they could
point to any what successes whatsoever
on the alternate energy front that have
actually produced a positive outcome
instead you see Germany you see the UK
where Energy prices are much more
expensive than they were before and much
more unreliable so how do you understand
and this is maybe where we could start
touching on issues uh broader issues of
Faith you know you characterized this
anti-industrial environmentalist
movement as a religious Enterprise it's
like how do you and you are you know
you've been involved in the political
game for a long time how do you
understand the fact that these policies
have St have started to become dogmatic
Doctrine and that they're being pushed
so hard you know across the political
Spectrum the Tories in the UK are worse
on the net zero front than the lefties
or at least as bad so how do you
understand how this happened given it's
that it's so Preposterous well that's a
very good question Jordan and let me
just give you one little anecdote which
I think might be telling um the other
week in London I went to the famous Farm
Street Jesuit Church uh we got to the
prayers of the faithful and one of the
prayers of the faithful was about the
rapid
decarbonization of our society now don't
normally stand up in church and object
and I wasn't going to break the habit of
a Lifetime on this particular day but I
did suddenly decide well buger it uh I
went online uh found the parish website
and sent a note uh to whoever was uh the
parish recipient of this thing saying
why the hell are you doing this the
other day father Dominic uh sent a
response to me uh saying that we have a
a moral obligation to reduce our
emissions as quickly as possible to
which I said well sure don't we also
have a moral obligation to try to ensure
that PE poor people in rich countries
and and poor countries more generally
have access to the affordable energy
that they need in order to have a decent
life now I don't expect to get a
response from father Dominic or anyone
else from the farm Street Jesuit church
but I do think that what we're seeing
here
is uh one of the many byproducts of the
decline of what I would regard as a more
substantial Faith because we human
beings tend to be um uh creatures of
faith maybe it's because we need Faith
uh maybe it's because there's just
something out there drawing us to Faith
um if if if we don't have faith in our
countries
if we don't have faith in our God if we
don't have faith in the religions that
have stood the test of time we'll find
new things to have faith in and even in
the heart of Catholicism uh we now have
this green thing uh which I think is
strange
unsettling fundamentally foreign uh and
it can lead nowhere good so I've been
thinking about this issue of needing
faith for a very long time you know and
the the classic objection of the
rationalist materialists i' say The
Atheist rationalist materialists is that
you shouldn't have faith in anything for
which there isn't proof and you know
there's a certain amount of you can give
a certain amount of credence to that
Viewpoint because it helps protect you
against
believing evidently counterproductive
Ive and foolish things but I think the
idea that you can't have faith or that
you don't have to have faith in anything
that isn't factual is misguided and
here's why so tell me what you think
about this well the problem with human
beings or a problem with human beings is
that we're fundamentally bounded by our
ignorance and so for example if you
embark on a marriage you have to take a
vow and in principle it's an unbreakable
vow and the reason you do that is
because you have to jump with both feet
with your partner into a kind of abyss
and the reason you have to do that is
because what the hell do you know you
don't know what's going to happen to you
in your life and so you take this person
and you say as a show of good faith
we're going to bind ourselves together
predicated on the assumption that we'll
be able to handle what comes at us
better as a honestly communicating and
loving couple than we could do with
sequential relationships or alone now we
don't know if that's true but we're
going to spend our whole life giving it
our best shot okay well that's an Act of
Faith because you don't have the
evidence for what's going to happen in
your life in front of you right okay you
do the same thing when you take a new
job right whenever you make an important
foray you have to say
I believe this could work if I abide by
this particular set of principles and
that's an Act of Faith okay so that's
ineradicable then you know you said
there's something drawing us to Faith
and so this is how it looks as far as I
can tell
that first of
all some things have to be more
important than others because if they're
not you can't do anything and the reason
for that is that if you're going to do
something you have to do that thing
instead of all the other things you
might have done or instead of nothing so
you have to prioritize and as soon as
you prioritize you have a hierarchy of
value and that means that if your
hierarchy of value is internally
consistent there has to be something at
the top of it now the the classic
judeo-christian answer to that conundrum
was that something like truth and love
the spirit of Truth and Love should at
the Pinnacle and that should be
expressed in honest discourse for
example that's part of the worship of
the word and and now if nothing is put
at the top then well then there's
nothing at the top and you have disunity
and
confusion and so there's there's no
there the only alternative to organizing
your perceptions and your actions in a
hierarchical manner with something at
the top is confusion and disunity
there's no third choice so I think
that's what draws us to Faith is that
we're drawn to integrate our perceptions
and our actions under a single scheme
and that helps stabilize us
psychologically because then we're not
confused and hopeless but it also unites
us socially because you know you and I
for example right now we can sit and
engage in civil discourse because we've
agreed on a unifying framework right
we're going to talk for 90 minutes we're
not going to play any tricks on each
other and we're going to see how that
goes and that means now we can cooperate
and compete in a peaceful manner okay so
I don't see any of I don't see that any
of that is replaceable now you know you
pointed out that if we don't have faith
in one thing we're either going to have
faith in nothing or in something else
and I it does seem to me to be the case
that you know Gia the Earth mother has
risen up as an alternative to let's say
yahwa and the and the classic and the
classic uniting god of the West and that
doesn't seem to me to be a reasonable
replacement well I I agree with you
Jordan and look uh the things that
really matter uh can't be proven
certainly they can't be proven in the
way that a mathematical formula uh or
some scientific experiment uh can be can
be proven um we can't prove uh that the
people close to us really love us they
can't prove that they are really loved
by us uh we have to take all this stuff
on trust
and similarly we absolutely need an
important purpose to our lives which is
above simple survival simple pleasure uh
just the basic satisfactions that um an
animal might seek uh we need to have a
purpose uh and whether the purpose is
looking after our loved ones whether the
purpose is being very good at a at a
necessary but quite possibly simple job
that we do as well as we can whether the
purpose is is love and respect for uh
the god that we think is our creator uh
every single human being to live well
needs a sense of purpose to his or her
life um once upon a time it was I
suppose Civic mind ESS um in the case of
some it was family commitment in the
case of others it was a sense of the
Divine in the in the case of still more
but all of those things are much weaker
today across the West than they were a
generation or two back but because we
are Faith focused people we will seek
other things and it might be money it
might be pleasure um henis in all its
forms or we might find some
alternative um a kind of green cult if
you like or a climate cult if you like
um saving the planet not from the devil
but saving the planet from a climate
apocalypse that might fill that Gap um
now again I say uh I think all sensible
people should be conservation minded I
don't want to see um beautiful buildings
demolished uh readily
I do not want to see uh our flora and
FAA devastated I take infinite
satisfaction and Delight uh in the waves
rolling in uh at Manley Beach uh when I
get down there every a morning uh on my
longboard I love to see the dolphins in
the distance and occasionally the spout
of a whale magnificent absolutely
magnificent but um
you can't worship that uh and certainly
this idea that we should uh fixate on
man's contribution to carbon dioxide
emissions I I just think is uh is odd
all right so let's let's walk through
this a little bit more conceptually so
so about 40 years ago 50 years ago
psychologists started
to analyze the manner in which the way
people describe themselves Aggregates
and they were looking at the
underlying statistical structure of
self-descriptive language so here was
the idea we're going to study
personality personality is reflected in
language if we could analyze the
statistical structure of language we
might be able to understand something
more about personality and so
psychologists did this they they
they aggregated great bodies of
descriptive phrases and sentences and
adjectives and found out by statistical
analysis kind of an early application of
AI by the way that temperament had five
Dimensions um extroversion neuroticism
agreeableness conscientiousness and
openness now neuroticism is the is the
dimension on which all the negative
emotions aggregate so if you're more
sensitive to anxiety you're more
sensitive to pain and frustration and
disappointment and guilt and that's like
a baseline sensitivity to Life's
challenges and so the higher in
neuroticism you are the more units of
physiological preparation you undertake
per unit of stress right and it's kind
of a guess okay now one of the things
psychologists discovered at the same
time was that all of the emotions
associated with attention to the to the
narrow self
we're indistinguishable from negative
emotion so self-consciousness is
actually a facet of neuroticism and so
to the degree that you focus on yourself
this is quite a stellar Discovery to the
degree that you think about yourself
that you're concerned about yourself
narrowly you are
simultaneously possessed by pain and
anxiety right now you kind of know that
because if you're out on stage and
you're addressing a crowd and you get
self-conscious it's very uncomfortable
you blush you lose your place you
stumble the same thing happens to
musicians if they're performing and so
self-consciousness is actually a
disruption of the natural flow of events
okay now when people are looking for
something that unites them let's say and
that calls to them they tend to look for
superordinate identities that are
outside the self so you could say well
you could find meaning in an intimate
relationship in with your family with
your local community with your state
with your nation and then maybe there's
something upon which the Integrity of
Nations itself rests I think that's the
word in the judeo-christian tradition by
the way and so you Nest your identity in
these superordinate elements and that's
also an element of faith and that takes
you well the benefit on the Hope side
you know you said people have to have
something to strive for if you don't
Nest your identity in these
superordinate social um uh
organizations then you end up impulsive
and hedonistic and self-focused and that
makes you hopeless and miserable correct
so that seems to be a bad solution okay
okay so so all right all right so we're
we're in agreement on that so okay so
let me ask you something more specific
then you know you are very intelligent
person you had you you won a road
scholarship that's a very difficult
thing to manage you studied a at Oxford
um and yet and I'm saying this as
Devil's Advocate you're also um uh
you're you're also a man of traditional
faith and so I might say well why how is
it that you have been able to balance
your intellect which tends you know the
intellect tends to have this corrosive
rational doubtful element that can
demolish traditional faith for example
which is certainly something that's
happened to many people and happen more
broadly culturally why did your faith
remain for you a central element of your
being and how have you reconciled that
intellectually well this might sound a
bit odd Jordan but
um I I think that um
humility is incredibly important to a
successful life uh I I mean you've got
to in a sense
Lose Yourself to find yourself you've
got to in a sense forget yourself to
fully flourish and I I guess one of the
things that I'm very conscious of is
that I don't have all the answers uh I
don't have all the
experience
uh I don't regard myself uh as morally
or intellectually Superior to my for to
my
forefathers
and I might have personal doubts but uh
I think it's important to
be sufficiently immersed in the
tradition uh at least to the at least to
the point where you respect it uh and
you allow it to work it's uh it's magic
on you and look uh uh you know my
personal faith waxes and wanes
one of the many reasons why I never
further pursued um something that I did
for a couple of years namely the
Catholic priesthood is because I didn't
think I had enough of a personal
relationship uh with uh with our Lord
and Master Jesus Christ to be able to
communicate that uh toh to people and
persuade people that they too uh could
have it uh but nevertheless uh the fact
that my faith was insufficient to move
mountains doesn't mean that I don't
respect it uh it doesn't mean that I
don't strive after it and it doesn't
mean that uh such that I have doesn't
sustain me I
mean the Bible is the root of all wisdom
inspiration and spiritual nourishment
the Hallow app empowers you to explore
the Bible's profound teachings and to
effortlessly incorporate them into your
daily life a great place to start while
you deepen your understanding of the
Bible is to check out father Mike
Schmid's Bible in a year available on
the Hallow app for brief daily readings
and Reflections here you can dive into
an extensive library of Bible reading
plans accompanied by insightful
Reflections and Audi guided meditations
whether you're a seasoned Bible reader
or just starting your journey hallow
provides a platform for you to engage
with scripture like never before
studying the Bible's literary Brilliance
has influenced countless writers poets
and artists throughout history by
studying the Bible yourself you'll gain
a deeper appreciation for the power of
Storytelling symbolism and metaphor
enriching your understanding of
literature across different genres the
Hallow app also helps you connect with a
community of like-minded individuals
sharing experiences insights and
encouragement along the path to
spiritual growth download the app for
free at hall.com Jordan you can set
reminders and track your progress along
the way enrich your education and
nurture your mind and soul today
download the Hallow app at hall.com
Jordan that's hall.com
Jordan hall.com Jordan for an exclusive
3-month free trial of all 10,000 plus
prayers and
meditations okay so you so you talked
about the role of of moral and
intellectual humility on that front so
okay so so I've been reading I've been
writing about the book of Exodus and I
conducted a seminar with a variety of
people people on that book I was reading
this section the other day where the
burning bush appears to Moses and it's
it's really a compelling section e
because at that point Moses is outside
of Egypt so he's no longer concerned
with the Tyranny or the pharoh or his
strange Heritage he's gone off to this
place called midia mid is mid midia
anyways to a foreign country it's midia
he's out with the midianites he's
married a woman there he's taking care
of his father-in-law's flocks uh they
respect him he's got himself a life you
know and it's kind of hassle-free and
he's wandering around near near Mount Si
interestingly enough when something
attracts his
attention right and he decides to turn
away from his path and to go
investigate and so to me what that story
is reflecting is the fact that in our
lives we'll be in a relatively
comfortable position position and
something will beckon to us that we can
decide to investigate and if we decide
to investigate that will well God Only
Knows what'll happen and that's what
happens to Moses he goes off the beaten
path he he goes to investigate the
burning bush and the burning bush is a
symbol of life and transformation at the
same time right because fire is a
transformative element so he goes to
investigate being that's life and
becoming that's transformation
and as he investigates it more deeply he
finds that he starts to walk on sacred
ground and God tells him he has to take
his shoes off that's humility right and
so and then as he investigates even more
deeply the god of the Old Testament
speaks to him and says that it's the
same voice that called to Jacob and
Isaac and Abraham and so this seems
relevant to the issue of respect for
tradition and so you could imagine
imagine that there's this
spirit that unites the great acts of
history right it's all a manifestation
of the same proper orientation towards
what's highest that's represented in
that story as the spirit of yahwah and
that part of what you do if you're
called upon to be a leader which is of
course the next thing that happens to
Moses is that you bow down and have
respect to that guiding spiritual
principle that's operated over the
entire corpor purp of history and so you
seem to be making Illusions to something
like that when you said that for some
reason you had a kind of intellectual or
moral humility now why did you have that
given the fact that you could have been
you could have been inordinately proud
of your own intellect I mean it was of
Stellar quality and you were definitely
rewarded for it so how do you think that
humility developed and why do you think
people who are listening should give it
some credence
well Jordan uh that wonderful story that
you've just so well developed for us is
one of the great civilizational stories
uh of our culture and of our history and
part of the modern tragedy is that we
know so much and yet we know so little
about the things that have really formed
and shaped us uh as as peoples and um
there's there's almost an Amnesia now
about the Bible stories whether it's Old
Testament or new testament uh there's an
indifference uh to to the great history
uh whether it's the Greeks the Romans uh
the history of of of the development of
England and so on and uh and how the
great ideas spread from these places
throughout much of the world um there's
just this uh ignorance
mixed with
scorn which I think is so sad uh I mean
we can know all about artificial
intelligence but if you don't know
anything about the culture and the
civilization which has made this
possible you are intellectually
impoverished however clever you might be
in so many areas now now this is this is
part of our part of our problem now I I
guess I was blessed if you like uh by um
this sense of respect verging on
reverence uh for our history and for our
Traditions when I was very young uh my
mother would probably on a weekly basis
bring me home the now almost forgotten
but back in the 1960s and70s very well
known ladybird books which
popularized um great historical stories
mostly from British history I hasten to
add but you know there was Alexander the
Great and Julius Caesar and uh Plato and
Aristotle and all these as well in there
and I just soaked it all up and so I
guess from a very young age uh I I I
wasn't scornful of these things I was
appreciative of these things I wasn't
rejecting of these things I was
respectful of these things and I guess
that's what
sustained Me For Better or For Worse all
the way through all right so so that's
very interesting observation so you were
exposed to biographical accounts of
greatness when you were a kid and those
affected you now I think and I was and I
was lucky I was lucky Jordan as a as a
as a youngster um I had nuns teaching me
uh when I was in in infant school I had
Jesuits who were presiding over my
primary and secondary
education uh these were the days before
uh the western church had been Afflicted
to the extent It ultimately was by I
guess the religious
self-doubt U that seems to have been
associated with elements of the second
Vatican Council uh these were impressive
human beings um whatever foibles and
faults they may have had they were
impressive human beings uh certainly
they immensely impressed and helped me
uh as a youngster and I've been lucky to
carry all that throughout my life thus
far I have had wonderful exemplars uh of
of Courage of faith of inspiration of
insight and that's brought me along
carried me in its wake and my challenge
is to be worthy of this great
benefaction that I had right right right
well you you also said that your mother
brought you these stories and that's
kind of interesting psychologically and
symbolically because what that means in
a sense is that your mother brought you
tales of the Great Men of the past which
indicated that your mother that so the
primary feminine influence in your life
was someone who believed that that
greatness of spirit actually existed now
you could imagine the counterpart right
because because you could have had a
mother or female teachers who were
bitterly resentful about the patriarchal
oppression of the past who believed that
every heroic figure was nothing other
than a patriarchal oppressor and that
was anti- masculine in the most
fundamental sense in that manner now you
know you see this there's lots of women
and this is increasingly true and I
think it's increasingly a consequence of
familial breakdown there's no shortage
of women
who have never had a positive
relationship with anyone masculine in
their whole life you know now I talked
to this leftist scholar Naomi wolf a
while back on my podcast you know and
and she's she wrote The Beauty myth and
she's been a pretty uh powerful voice on
the left on the pro patriarchal
oppression front right I mean that's a
narrative she buys but you know she was
raped when she was 11 and then she had a
pretty dismal experience with someone
who was supposed to Mentor her in
University and it left her fractured and
with a permanent animus against men you
know and and you can see that sort of
thing spiring out of control but your
mother had respect for these historical
figures what was the relationship
between your mother and your father like
on the personal front look
um you
know I I don't clim to have seen um
every intimate moment so to speak but uh
my mom and dad had a long and I think
pretty successful marriage and they
raised four kids who have turned out to
be okay um all of us respected well my
mom's still alive uh uh all of us
respected our parents very much and have
done our best to honor them but uh look
I absolutely Ely accept Jordan that
again to use a phrase that the Jesuits
used to use back in the day uh in a
sense we are all the product of those
who have loved us or failed to love us
and I guess if if you've come from a
from an affirming and supportive
intellectually curious um capable family
you are more likely to turn out with a
certain set of attitudes than if the
opposite has been the case uh and yeah I
can fully understand why someone whose
experience of of others has been bitter
um how they they might be
less optimistic and outgoing
but if you believe as I do that most
people most of the time are basically
good um and if you think as I do that
the challenge is every day to try to
come closer to being your best self
well that's uh that's a good way to live
your life because even if it's not
perfect at least you won't be concerned
with bitterness yeah well that that's
something that can stop the tragedy from
degenerating into hell so that's at
least a it's least a door stop against
the catastrophe of life you know i' I've
thought that through a lot partly as a
consequence of working as a clinician
you know I've and I've seen people in
very dire situations and it's certainly
the case that if jik tragedies come to
visit you in life you can make the
situation a hell of a lot worse by
becoming bitter and resentful you know
and you could point to the catastrophes
and say look I have every reason to be
bitter and resentful and the proper
response to that is well be that as it
may and you could well be right if you
go down that road tempted towards it by
the weight of your suffering all that
will do is make your suffering much
worse and universalize it yeah see
that's that's what the Book of Job
concentrates on so in such an
interesting manner because job has
absolutely every reason to lift his
middle finger towards the sky and to
curse God I mean God literally Bets with
Satan that Satan can't take job out you
know and that's that's a pretty rough
situation right and but I think the
moral of the story is something like no
matter what happens to you in your life
and this is a this is a of a thing
to say you know no matter what happens
to you in your life no matter how deep
the degradation and the suffering you
are called upon to maintain faith in the
essential goodness of being and to
orient yourself upward you know and
that's that's a hell of a thing to ask
of people butre the alternative seems to
be degeneration into a kind of hopeless
and bitter misery exactly right and and
one of the books that I read as a
youngster was Victor frankl's famous
book from death camp to existentialism
um now I didn't know too much still
don't know too much about the
existentialism but I do know uh that he
survived that uh by virtue of uh
focusing on the love he had for his wife
um the love he had for his family um
because if you have a why as he kept
saying you can bear any how the tragedy
is
that the modern world while having less
and less in the way of objective
difficulties um has less and less of the
why that will eni us to endure the
how so you talked about humility as a
precondition for your development of a
certain kind of respect for the
accomplishments of the past
and you know we we could also talk about
so so one of the one of what something
I've learned about the
religious Enterprise is
that the emphasis on virtues like
humility is allied with a sense that
that has to be practiced so the practice
of faith in that regard is to actually
practice to to to consciously adopt an
attitude let's say of humility and
humility might be in principle you know
I still have something to learn I could
learn to listen better I could learn to
attend better to the Treasures of the
past I'm an ignorant creature I should
conduct myself in that manner I should
seek wisdom and and there are all sorts
of counter positions that the full play
of the rational mind can produce that
will fight fight against that impulse
but it is something you can practice and
the same thing seems to apply to let's
say an attitude of
gratitude
um that and and this is also the part of
the problem with the idea that of you
the fact that you of the idea that you
could Orient Yourself by mere facts like
if you look at the conditions of life
especially when things are not going
well for you you could easily Proclaim
like the anti-natalist proclaimed that
life is so bloody miserable in its
Essence that it would be better if it
didn't exist at all that's
mephistophiles by the way in FS uh in in
girth is faou right is the whole
Enterprise should just be scrapped
because the suffering is just too much
well the alternative to that is to
attempt to practice finding what's good
I suppose even in the darkest spots you
know like when my wife a while back my
wife was afflicted with with what she
had been told would be a terminal cancer
and in fact the cancer that she had had
only been reported by 200 people and
every single one of them died within 10
months so it was pretty damn dismal you
know and I watched
her nearly Die daily for like nine
months it was rough and then she had
surgical complications
that you know the surgery probably it
was certainly one of the factors that
saved her life but it also put her in
great Peril you know and
she what did she do to cope with that
well she turned to the things that she
had in her life that were positive right
she really opened herself up for example
to the love of her children in a way
that even though she had been a very
good mother and had a very close
relationship with her kids she found a
dimension of Love of of that maternal
love that was fathomless I would say and
that really helped her you know and she
also decided when her
father her father had to cope with the
long-term neurological degeneration of
his wife she had prefrontal dementia and
she deteriorated from the age of about
55 to about 70 you know in the in the
way that neurological diseases take you
out piece by piece and he did that he
was stellar he took care of her like a
champ and like he was a real man about
town but he's he just reoriented himself
in a selfless manner that was something
to behold and he was also willing to
accept help and that's another thing
that happened to Tammy when she was Ill
is that she abandoned a lot of her
pretensions and she allowed people into
her life to support her and that was
also part of that practice of being
grateful even even under Dreadful
circumstances and Jordan This Is Where
suffering is not ever something that we
should go out and seek but if suffering
finds us um if we if we react rightly to
it it it is in its own way or it can be
at least in its own way
ennobling and U I'm thinking of a of a
good friend of mine whose wife uh
ultimately died of dementia
um for four or five years um she didn't
know him but he went every day even
so and you could say well why did he
bother
well just in case she did know and
because that was the duty of a husband
for a wife in extremis and we can say
well let's try to you know baptize the
suffering uh let's try to make the most
of this or we can say it's all too hard
and we can euthanase people um we can
institutionalize people and and I just
think it's important that we choose the
better way uh as as far as we humanly
can we should choose the better way and
again if we go back to the to the
teachings of of holy mother church I
mean it's best if you get something out
of the sacraments but even if you don't
you should keep going uh because you
just never know um and maybe even if you
don't think you're getting anything out
of it uh you might actually be getting
something out of it um which is is
beyond your comprehension but is
nevertheless making a difference well
you know when when I was a kid 13 or so
and starting to turn away from the
Protestant church church that my mother
in particular was part of we didn't have
a particularly religious home but she
went to church every Sunday and she
liked to sing and she like the community
and I got pretty skeptical about
probably about my emerging understanding
of the conflict hypothetical conflict
between say evolutionary views of the
origin of man and the views that were
being put forth in the church and
decided that it was appropriate for me
ethically to stop going uh which caused
my mother a certain amount of distress
um
now part of my cynicism at that time I
suppose was the kind of standard Petty
observation of weekend about the
criticism of weekend Christians right
people go to church for an hour a week
and they Proclaim their allegiance to
this virtuous pathway and then they go
back out into the world and do exactly
what they were going to do anyways and
you know there's some truth to that I
suppose in that everyone can be
hypocritical but that was also true of
me and I had an insufficient
understanding of that at the time but I
would also say and this is to your point
about what the practice might be doing
for you even if you don't understand it
is that you know even an hour badly
spent contemplating your own
inadequacies let's say in the form of
sin and trying to aim upward seems to be
an improvement over never doing it all
at all for even a minute and which is
seems to be the alternative right
because once you scrap the church and
this is the sort of thing that people
like Richard Dawkins and the atheist
types would have us do will'll just
dispense with all that and his plan was
that we'd all become Enlightenment
rationalists but we tend to degenerate
into polytheistic pagans instead and
then we don't even give a second's
thought to anything approximating a
higher moral Endeavor and and then these
weird quasi religions grip us and pull
us down
exactly right look you know I do not
claim to be a particularly virtuous
person uh and I certainly do not put
myself on any kind of a pedestal uh but
I am
confident uh not that Faith makes us
good but that Faith makes us better and
I am sure that I would be even worse but
for the fact that U I had a wonderful
early beginning um and even now um
pretty
imperfectly I try to practice it all so
when you were when you were the leader
of the opposition that was 2009 to 2013
and then you were prime minister for two
years now you you said that you didn't
regard yourself as a sufficiently
developed person on the moral front
let's say to uh to enter the priesthood
you you you studied as a Catholic
seminarian and so you you took the
devil's route into politics let's say I
saw the do you yeah you saw the dark
okay well so so tell me about your
experiences as the leader of the
opposition and as Prim Minister I mean
you got to see how things operated at
the highest level both nationally and
internationally and so what did you
learn about people and what did you
learn about the kind of machinations
that go on at the highest politic iCal
levels and I'm I'm also curious about
your experiences on the international
front like with organizations like the
world economic forum and so forth so
what what conclusions did you derive
from this time that you spent so
integrally involved in the political
landscape well
um I I think the important thing is to
say what you mean and do what you say
and it doesn't matter whether you're the
local cobbler um or the local school
teacher uh or um a professor of law uh
or indeed the leader of a country I just
think you've got to say what you mean
and do what you say and there were some
leaders that I interacted with who I
thought were brilliant and capable but I
never really sensed that they were being
fed income with me and there were others
who were probably less brilliant uh uh
in some ways but um
I got the impression that they were
being straight with me and um always
that's the test um can you be straight
with someone and do you think that
person is being being straight with you
and um and I guess knowing that the
world is made up of all sorts of
different people um some of whom will
try to be helpful some of whom will not
try to be helpful you've got to try to
to conduct yourself in such a way that
the people whose welfare it is your duty
to advance are as best as you can manage
it having their their their wellbeing
Advanced so as opposition leader it was
my job to try to work out what the then
government was doing wrong uh and what I
might do that would make it less wrong
or perhaps even more right uh and then
in government it was my job to try to
ensure that to the extent government can
it's it's making bad situations better
making good situations better knowing
that um you're never going to make it
all right uh there are some things which
you probably can't even begin to improve
so you've got to know what's within the
purview of government and what's not
really uh and it and it's a question I
suppose of applying your insights and
your judgment um
hopefully I guess helped by such
character as you've managed to develop
over the years uh in in in ways which
make sense and make a difference and
look I can talk about different
different policies uh but in the end the
job of everyone in public life is first
to do no harm and then to try to respond
intelligently to to the exigencies of
the day all the time hoping to nudge
things in a better Direction uh as best
you can tell um that's the duty of
everyone in public life how how would
you
analyze the narrow and broader success
of your attempts to play a straight game
when you were prime minister I mean
you're you're you you ran into a lot of
opposition and and and your faith ran
into a lot of opposition as well and you
know a cynic might look at your record
and say well if you would have um being
a little more instrumental in your
tactics a little more mellan let's say
you might not have run into so much
difficulty in opposition I'm not
necessarily saying that's the case I'm
asking
in
retrospect know you attempted to play a
straight game in some ways I think you
were a man out of time you you you know
what I mean is that your the qualities
that you brought to the position weren't
necessarily the ones that were being
demanded loudly and publicly at the time
you know and your Catholicism for
example is certainly something that
exists in opposition to the new
environmentalist
ethos arguably so at least and so so do
do you think that attempting to play a
straight game worked for you and if so
how and do you think that politics tends
to attract people who are more likely to
play a crooked game than
other modes of interacting with the
world business art culture well
Jordan I think it would be generally
thought uh or conceded that I was a a
very Ive leader of the opposition in
that I brought my side of politics back
into government in record time um now I
did that by I
suppose uh ruthlessly focusing on the
mistakes of the then government and
coming up with what I thought were uh
feasible and principled and effective
ways of of of improving that now I got
into government and it would generally
be thought that I was less effective as
a prime minister and I guess the fact
that my own party uh replac me after two
years would would provide a certain
validation to that but nevertheless I
did my best toh try to temper the
emissions
Obsession uh I did my best to stop the
Border Protection disaster and I think
pretty much completely succeeded uh in
that uh I did my best to uh get taxes
down in fact abolished a couple of taxes
uh big taxes the carbon tax and the
mining tax uh did my best to reduce the
regulatory burden uh did my best to
honor and respect uh the traditions and
the institutions which had stood the
test of time now now because uh I was
probably um against the
Zeitgeist in a way that most
contemporary politic itions are not uh I
did attract a kind of visceral dislike
including from people inside my own
party who were happy enough uh when I
was a successful leader of the
opposition uh to put up with this uh
more traditional conservative approach
to things but decided once we were in
government uh that they they could do
better but look it it's just it's just
one of those things I mean so why do you
think why do you think you were so so
like universally claimed as effective as
leader of the opposition and that that
was then flipped on its head to some
degree when you became prime minister
when you became the Prime Minister
itself right it doesn't exactly stand to
reason so what do you think happened
well well Jordan the leader of the
opposition has effectively one job to
get his team into government uh the
leader of a government has many jobs uh
you you've got to try to ensure that
everything which is the per in the
purview of government is is handled as
well as it can so so um running a
government is much harder than leading
an opposition um it is and it's
particularly difficult at the moment
given that we are more fragmented and
more polarized um in the west than we
have been for a long long time and I
suppose I I I think it was more
difficult as a
conservative uh because there's a sense
in which you're against the Zeitgeist
you're out of sympathy with the temper
of the times but rather than conform
yourself uh to the so-called signs of
the times I think the important thing is
to push on with what you think is right
and do your best to be good enough to
overcome the uh the difficulties of of
of these times and not withstanding the
fact that I was only there for two years
I think it was probably the most
successful two years of the nine years
of the recent coalition government in
this country so you know I talked to BB
Netanyahu about issues that were similar
to this and he made himself dreadfully
unpopular at one point in his political
career by pursuing a round of radical uh
uh measures aimed at transforming Israel
economically and as far as I can tell
those worked but they took about 10
years to bear fruit and he was sort of
in the political Wilderness that entire
time but he certainly came back with a
vengeance and so one of the things I'm
curious about is you know are you
pleased about the fact that you stuck to
your guns and if so why given the defeat
on the Electoral front and also what did
you learn Le from suffer from and
benefit from as a consequence of being
attacked in the manner that you were one
of one of the phrases I think I used on
the night I was ejected from the
parliament Jordan is that it's better to
be a fighter than a quitter and if
you're not prepared to
lose
uh in a good cause you're not really
prepared to fight for a good cause and
and and so look uh I'm I'm pleased that
um I did try to resist the emissions
Obsession uh I did try uh to get the
government less burdensome on people's
lives I I did try to ensure that our
country had a degree of Integrity in its
borders uh I did try to ensure that our
country was a was a was an effective and
valuable Ally
uh to to our friends and and
look um there are a few things that I
guess I might have done differently um
everyone makes mistakes but uh but
fundamentally I think what I was trying
to do was good and
proper um could I have been more
amoliant from time to time with
colleagues of course um could I have
lavished a little more time on some
people sure um might I have expressed
myself better in different circumstances
well absolutely uh I've done plenty of
dodgy interviews over the years who
hasn't um but uh but I think what I
think I think the the project if you
like uh the purpose if you like was uh
was good and right and I'd do it again
in a heartbeat
what and what made you prepared to lose
do you
think
well
um in the in the
end uh it's it's about trying to make a
difference
and if you want to make a
difference you've got to strive for it
and if you're prepared to sacrifice that
would you are striving for in order to
win it's not about the cause it's about
it's about you
and this is the problem in our public
life right now uh too many people seem
to
be
about
preferment
promotion
um it's it's about them it's not about
the country uh it's not about the
cause um they would rather stay in
office than make a difference yeah it's
a very narrow it's a very narrow
conception of self I mean one of the
problems with so if you look at the life
outcomes of psychopaths and psychopaths
are particularly interesting a because
they're they're completely
self-interested in this in the narrowly
selfish sense but one of the interesting
things about Psychopaths is they betray
their future selves just as badly as
they betray other people so like a
psychopath will take momentary
gratification whenever he can get it and
the problem with that is that there's
always a price to be paid and so
psychopaths are completely incapable of
learning from experience and they're
much more likely to end up in prison and
the reason for that is that that
impulsive narrow focus on the demands of
the self actually turns out to be a very
very bad medium to long-term strategy
even if you're thinking
selfishly right because you're not
conceptualizing how you're going to be
interacted with by people over for any
span of time it's all about now you know
and when we talk about the power
mongerer types being selfish it isn't
just that they're selfish it's that
they're stupidly and narrowly selfish in
a manner that can't sustain itself yeah
one of the things that I often used to
say to myself was no unnecessary enemies
now there are some necessary enemies
because if you want to do something that
you really believe is right for the
country and others oppose it they are
going to be your enemies and you just
can't avoid that but uh but let's not
gratuitously offend people
because we can I mean that's the mark of
the bully it's not the mark of someone
who has at least tried to be a Statesman
yeah yeah well no unnecessary enemies
that's sort of like the doctrine of
minimal necessary Force oh it's a good
Doctrine let's turn our attention if you
don't mind um to the international
landscape and so you have given a lot of
thought for example to the issue of
China um I'm not a big fan of the CCP
not least because they support North
Korea and I would say that any state
that supports North Korea is let's call
them questionable on the moral front to
say the least and so and you guys in
Australia you have to deal with China in
a way that's even more um immediate and
threatening and promising than than than
say those of us who are a little bit
more distant and so what do you see
looming on the international front Visa
China their economy doesn't seem to be
very stable they seem to be degenerating
into a very comprehensive surveillance
State tyranny the Our Hope in the west
that increasing material wealth would
liberalize China doesn't seem to be
bearing fruit although you know the
Chinese aren't starving and there
there's something to be said for that
and we've had a lot of cheap Goods as a
consequence so what how do you how do
you
conceptualize China the West's proper
relationship with China what what are
your views in that
domain well I think it was uh the uh the
current American Secretary of State
blinken uh who said that we would uh
cooperate where we
can uh we will uh compete where we
should and confront where we must I
think that was the formula he used and I
actually thought that was quite a good
formula uh in my time uh when
MH370 disappeared into the Wast of the
Indian Ocean with 240 people on board of
whom about 150 were Chinese Nationals
uh Australia put everything we had into
that search because because that was the
right thing to do and I think the
Chinese government uh appreciated that
by the same token when China declared
unilaterally air defense identification
zones over parts of the East and South
China Seas we flew military jets through
that there because um again that was the
right thing to do uh when China was
trying to create this Asia
infrastructure Investment Bank
against the wishes of both America and
Japan our very good friends and allies
we were prepared to join this um
although we insisted on changes to the
governance structure because we wanted
it to reflect uh the kind of governance
structures that uh Global bodies
typically had rather than being simply a
proxy for the communist government in
Beijing so so look I think in my time
we did pretty well uh we successfully
secured uh the first free trade deal
between China and a G20 country but
prior to 2015 I think it was still
possible to be optimistic about China uh
and to think that even under the
CCP um economic modernization was going
ultimately to lead to a degree of
political liberalization and that over
the the dec ades there would be some
kind of of of convergence if you like
unfortunately as we discovered in the co
period if there was any convergence
taking place we were getting more like
communist China than they were getting
like the liberal like the liberal West
uh so so my my attitude to China and to
the
CCP uh I think was fair enough
overoptimistic perhaps but it was fair
enough back then uh my my view today is
is is quite different
um China is increasingly oppressing its
own
citizens uh it has crushed the freedom
of Hong Kong one of the world's great
cities uh it's um being monstrous
towards its weager its own weager
citizens um it's bullying and
threatening all its
neighbors and it's now particularly
focused on on taking Taiwan by force if
necessary now now I I think that
um if the Beijing regime
believes that it will be 1.4 billion
Chinese against 24 million
Taiwanese uh at some point in the near
future they will strike um and I just
think it would be
horrific for 24 million Taiwanese to
have their lives surrendered into the
hands of a brutal
dictatorship
um and while no one wants conflict uh I
think it is important uh for free
countries like Australia uh to join with
our partners and allies such as the
United States such as Japan such as the
United Kingdom to say very clearly to
Beijing um there will be the most severe
consequences if you try to alter the
status quo by force uh across the Taiwan
Straits um as I said earlier Jordan um
uh the Ukraine war has been a
catastrophe uh but it would be any War
over
Taiwan uh would would be several orders
of magnitude greater and I think we have
to do everything we can to deter that
but I think strength is much more likely
to deter than
weakness and so you seem to be quite
concerned about the probability of uh
Chinese Assault on Taiwan and so you
know in my darker moments I think well
if I was running the CCP
um a little distraction to take my
citizens attention away from the
catastrophes on the domestic economic
front might be quite welcome there's
nothing that unites a fractious
population more than a targeted enemy um
it's pretty easy thing to use propaganda
to to um you know to agitate for a
vision of a unified China as it should
be and so it would be a lovely
distraction and so and you said you know
you you take a peace through strength
approach let's say and you talked a
little bit you you made some illusion a
little bit to um deterring China like
what do you think that the West could do
on the deterrence front that wouldn't uh
increase the probability of a
cataclysmic interchange between the west
and China see this the terrifying thing
about China is
that they're likely more willing to
sacrifice their citizens than we
are right and God only knows what they'd
price they'd be willing to pay to to
invade Taiwan for example especially if
that gave them a purchase on power for
another five years so that's a very hard
enemy to deal with right because if
they'll light themselves on fire to
singe you they're that's a pretty
difficult thing to contend with I I I I
take your point Jordan and I take your
point and I and I I particularly take
your point
that uh a dictatorship in trouble is a
more more unpredictable and dangerous
dictatorship than a dictatorship that
thinks that its best days are ahead
um but likewise uh I don't think that
free countries can be Blas about the
fate of what is practically a free and
independent country um I don't think
that the Democracy should depart from
the one China policy um I don't think
that the United States should change its
strategic ambiguity as such but I do
think that uh back channels um and
certain practical steps ought to be
taken uh to try to ensure that Beijing
is under no Illusions uh about uh about
the magnitude of of the challenge it
would face and and I'm not necessarily
President Biden's greatest fan but on
this particular issue um his statements
repeated now I think four times that the
United States would defend Taiwan uh May
well have sent a strong message to
Beijing even though when officials have
subsequently walked them back they have
stressed that the uh posture of
strategic ambiguity has not changed I
mean I think he has actually changed
what strategic ambiguity means without
abandoning the
term what are your thoughts sir on the
on the situation Visa Russia and the
Ukraine well Jo I know that's a
complicated topic and well look
um again I I don't say this is easy um
but I think what Putin is doing is
monstrous um I think it's monstrous um
he regards Ukraine as a rebel Province
just as Beijing regards Taiwan as a
rebel
Province and um unlike Taiwan which has
had a a kind of a legally
ambiguous situation now for for decades
Ukraine has been fully and legally
independent uh for 30 odd years um Putin
has never accepted that
um even though Ukraine was no threat to
Russia uh even though NATO was no threat
to Russia uh he sent his army across the
border uh expecting a rapid Victory
expecting that his death squads would
find and eliminate president
zalinski the ukrainians have turned out
to be much more united much more heroic
much better prepared much more
imaginative much more creative on the
battlefield uh and so for the last 15
months uh they have at worst stalemated
the Russians and in some ways bested the
Russians notwithstanding the fact that
Russia has has vastly more resources
vastly more manpower vastly better
weaponry and um I think it's the duty
of of free countries such as mine uh to
try to avoid escalating the war sure but
also to try to do whatever we can to
help the ukrainians into the most
advantageous possible position in if
things went optimally let's say for the
ukrainians and but realistically
optimally for the ukrainians and for the
West how do you you think like what do
you conceptualize as an ending you know
because one of the things I've really
tried to puzzle out is well what's the
endgame here like if we got what we
wanted and by we I mean the West that's
supporting Ukraine if we got what we
wanted what would that look like do you
do you have a sense of that well ideally
it would be um Ukraine regaining every
inch of its territory and driving every
last Russian so
off its land ideally that would be what
it looks like um now in the end I think
it's up to the ukrainians to decide uh
what they are prepared to accept um but
at the moment uh despite the fact that
Putin is relentlessly and mercilessly uh
devastating their
infrastructure pulverizing their cities
uh they are determined to fight uh and
the extraordinary thing is that this
message that we got um very very
pervasively prior to the 24th of
February last year that really there
were the Western
ukrainians uh and then there were the
sort of Russian ukrainians um that
appears to be largely a a a Putin
inspired myth um the Russians speaking
ukrainians appear to have been almost as
a bed by the brutality of the Russian
invasion as everyone else um and Putin
has succeeded in uniting the country in
a way that maybe no one else has so look
I think I think out of respect for the
heroism of the
ukrainians uh we have to leave them to
determine what they think uh is a
satisfactory outcome um
obviously uh we do not have to support
and I would not expect this for a second
um
any official UK Ukrainian incursions
into Russia uh but I do think that NATO
and NATO's Partners such as Australia
should first do everything we humanly
can to help the
ukrainians uh into the best possible
position
militarily uh B um say to uh the
ukrainians that once this war is over of
course we will admit you uh into NATO uh
and see if there is any use of nuclear
weapons by the Russians well we will
then immediately admit you to Nato that
would be I think a reasonable position
uh for Ukraine's friends to adopt which
is trying to avoid
escalation uh while at the same time
trying to avoid um the Triumph of
aggression and
dictatorship so all right we're we're
coming to the end of our time on YouTube
um I know you have a hard out that we
negotiated a PRI and so I won't ask you
any more questions I would however like
to offer you the opportunity if you
think it's would be useful to address
anything that you think might be um well
communicated to people on whatever broad
International level we manag with this
podcast is there is there anything else
that you'd like to say to people before
before we close up this this segment
well Jordan obviously I'm here because I
have a great deal of respect for the
work you've done over the last few years
and I particularly admire the way you
have
reached uh a wide International audience
particularly uh an audience of younger
men uh and try to remind them of the
enduring virtues uh you have tried to
give them through your own insights and
your own experience uh something to live
for and some ways of actually grasping
uh those those essential truths and look
um I just think that
uh
uh countries like
Australia and and look I I would extend
this to the anglosphere in particular
and I suppose to the Western World more
generally we have achieved so much um
and largely through the influence um of
the anglo-american
ascendancy the whole world in
2020 was more prosperous it was more
safe it was more more free than it ever
before than ever before in human history
and rather than um
despise uh and
reject the values that created that we
should cherish and admire them uh and
yes to do our best to renew them and
take them forward uh
because I
want the future to be at least as good
as the recent
past uh and yet things look much more
ominous now than at any time since the
early 1940s
and I I don't think we're going to fix
it um by surrender uh whether it's
economic surrender whether it's military
surrender whether it's cultural and
civilizational surrender um surrender is
not the way um a a decent and
self-confident um
approach is is going to be best for
everyone well hopefully hopefully that
that hopefully that's something that we
can outline in more detail with this
Alliance for responsible citizenship you
know and what what what was it the
Churchill said at the beginning of his
of his of his histories of the second
world war um in defeat
Defiance in war
resolution in peace Goodwill and in
Victory magnanimity I mean something
like that is what we need today yeah
yeah well it would be lovely what we're
hoping to do is to help inspire a vision
for the future that draws on the wisdom
of the past with respect for the past
with the kind of respect for the past
that you describe developing you know
over the course of your life that people
can Ally themselves with voluntarily
that will provide them with hope and
that will offer a respit from
unnecessary anxiety and and with
tremendous emphasis on the voluntary
element right we we don't want to
produce a vision that would rely on
compulsion force and fear to implement
but that would be Invitational instead
and I don't think that that's a pipe
dream I think that that's actually what
everyone who has any sense and who
thinks about it for any length of time
would want and so I'll see you in London
I believe at the end of October and so
that should be extraordinarily
interesting and we certainly appreciate
your participation I'm looking forward
to it Jordan thank you all right well
thank you sir thank you to everyone
watching and listening on the YouTube
side um um for your time and attention
and to the dailywire plus crew for
facilitating this conversation and uh uh
thank you again Mr Abbott for your your
time and your Insight and that's all
much appreciated we we've had a lot of
uh positive response in relationship to
the ark on the Australian side and so
that's been very heartening and um we're
hoping that that'll produce all sorts of
positive things in the future so thank
you very much sir very good talking to
you today thank
[Music]
you